Polythene bags effects on environment

THE use of polythene bags in Pakistan is on the rise and so are its devastating consequences, Commonly known as ‘shoppers’, these plastic bags are available in all sizes, shapes and colours and because of their lightweight, flexibility and low cost they are used and cast off freely. The black bags are considered more dangerous to environment as compared to white bags, because when polythene bags are recycled they are given black colour and these kinds of bags are completely non-degradable. The polythene bags can also lead to the spread of diseases. This is because the polythene bags can easily block the the sewerage and water pies which can eventually lead to the spread of the Diseases Polyethene is also likele to clog the drains causing problems in the water flow of the pipes. The pipe blockages would cause flooding and the free flow of water is disturbed.Polyethene is harmful for animals if swallowed. It can accumulate in the bowels which ultimately becomes lethal to the animal.In most households poly bags are used to preserve food items. Reused bag may be contaminated  by materials harmful to human health A lot is unknown on how severely humans are physically affected by these chemicals. Some of the chemicals used in plastic production can cause dermatitis upon contact with human skin. In many plastics, these toxic chemicals are only used in trace amounts, but significant testing is often required to ensure that the toxic elements are contained within the plastic by inert material or polymer. they can harbor dangerous bacteria from meat drippings and other foods.
There are always alternatives to plastic bags and the search for more alternatives continues. Paper bags are a possible option but they also take their toll on the environment. The use of trees to increase the production of paper products combined with the increased energy that is required to make paper bags will also have a negative environmental effect.Reusable plastic bags are being introduced to regions that want to outlaw the plastic bag altogether. These are stronger and more durable and can be used for three to five trips to the store.Of course, the reusable cloth bag is fast becoming a favorite among environmental supporters. While thus far no bag is without its issues these are the bags that are currently recommended for use to help protect environmental concerns.
The need of the hour is that though it is not possible to ban the use of cheap polythene bags altogether, a regulatory mechanism can be introduced that ensures that only particular types of polyethylene material is produced that can decay in a short span of time or recyclable material should be used.Recycled plants should be set up that can save a good amount of money as well as energy. Stakeholders must work out ways to lessen the impact of plastic bags on the environment.


